In this lecture we talk about non-traditional evaluation of large language models.
So beyond traditional metrics like blue or rogue, more advanced evaluation techniques focuses on semantic
understanding and fluency of the text.
Three such techniques are embedding similarities perplexity and LM based scoring.
Like how we saw in our last lecture.
So what is this embedding similarity is all about?
Well, embedding similarity measures how semantically close two pieces of text are, rather than just
comparing exact word.
This is done by using similarity between two vectors.
Generated text and reference text is calculated using the cosine similarities Euclidean distance or
dot product.
So these are the things that we use to do the vector comparison over there.
And if you remember, we were also doing this vector similarity using the vector store of similarity
underscore search with score we try to provide like explain.
The attention is all you need.
And we also had one more result which is saying explain attention in transformer.
So we were having two uh same similar kind of the text over there.
They talk about the same thing.
You can see that attention is all you need.
And attention in transformer.
While this vector database had got the similar storage of the text in there after embedding.
So we saw the score were pretty close for both of them.
So they are not like different at all.
They're pretty close to that.
And that was just printed for us over here.
So this is how we verified like how semantically close two pieces of text are rather than just comparing
the exact word.
So this we already saw in our earlier sections of this course before.
And the next one is the perplexity.
So perplexity is the measure of how well a language model predicts a given text.
Lower perplexity means better fluency and coherence.
So that is another way that you can measure or predict how a given text is going to be performed during
the given point of time.
And finally, the LM based scoring.
This is quite interesting because we are going to be doing this LM based scoring in this particular
course most of the time, because that is amazing, because you will see that instead of relying on
traditional metrics, LMS themselves can be used to evaluate generated text.
This can be done using prompt based evaluation, where another LM is prompted to rate the generated
response based on criteria like relevance, coherence, factuality, or and grammatically.
And then it also does the ranking based evaluation.
The LM compares multiple outputs and rank them.
And finally self-consistency.
The LM generates multiple responses and evaluates them for consistency.
So you will notice that in here, for the very first time, we are going to be using another LMS, which
is going to act as a teacher LMS, which is going to act as a teacher, LMS, which is going to really,
really stand aside.
And then it is going to be it is going to be helping you to test how you can actually verify the prompt
based evaluation or ranking based evaluation and self-consistency.
So there are going to be two LMS to perform an action in here.
And this is the one way of you to verify the LM based scoring to see if they are as expected.